Computer programming
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Software development process
Core activities

    Requirements Design Construction Testing Debugging Deployment Maintenance

Paradigms and models

    Software engineering Waterfall Cleanroom Incremental Spiral V-Model Agile Inner source

Methodologies and frameworks

    Prototyping RAD UP XP TSP PSP DSDM MSF Scrum Kanban Dual Vee Model TDD ATDD BDD FDD DDD MDD IID Lean DevOps

Supporting disciplines

    Configuration management Infrastructure as Code Documentation Software quality assurance (SQA) Project management User experience WinOps

Tools

    Compiler Debugger Profiler GUI designer Modeling IDE Build automation Release automation Testing

Standards and BOKs

    CMMI IEEE standards ISO 9001 ISO/IEC standards SWEBOK PMBOK BABOK

    v t e

Computer programming (often shortened to programming) is a process that leads from an original formulation of a computing problem to executable computer programs. Programming involves activities such as analysis, developing understanding, generating algorithms, verification of requirements of algorithms including their correctness and resources consumption, and implementation (commonly referred to as coding[1][2]) of algorithms in a target programming language. Source code is written in one or more programming languages. The purpose of programming is to find a sequence of instructions that will automate performing a specific task or solving a given problem. The process of programming thus often requires expertise in many different subjects, including knowledge of the application domain, specialized algorithms, and formal logic.

Related tasks include testing, debugging, and maintaining the source code, implementation of the build system, and management of derived artifacts such as machine code of computer programs. These might be considered part of the programming process, but often the term software development is used for this larger process with the term programming, implementation, or coding reserved for the actual writing of source code. Software engineering combines engineering techniques with software development practices.

Contents

    1 Overview
    2 History
    3 Modern programming
        3.1 Quality requirements
        3.2 Readability of source code
        3.3 Algorithmic complexity
        3.4 Methodologies
        3.5 Measuring language usage
        3.6 Debugging
    4 Programming languages
    5 Programmers
    6 General Programming Reference Sheet
    7 See also
    8 References
    9 Further reading
    10 External links

Overview

Within software engineering, programming (the implementation) is regarded as one phase in a software development process.

There is an ongoing debate on the extent to which the writing of programs is an art form, a craft, or an engineering discipline.[3] In general, good programming is considered to be the measured application of all three, with the goal of producing an efficient and evolvable software solution (the criteria for "efficient" and "evolvable" vary considerably). The discipline differs from many other technical professions in that programmers, in general, do not need to be licensed or pass any standardized (or governmentally regulated) certification tests in order to call themselves "programmers" or even "software engineers" - but note that use of the term "engineer" is tighty regulated in many parts of the world.

Because the discipline covers many areas, which may or may not include critical applications, it is debatable whether licensing is required for the profession as a whole. In most cases, the discipline is self-governed by the entities which require the programming, and sometimes very strict environments are defined (e.g. United States Air Force use of AdaCore and security clearance). Another ongoing debate is the extent to which the programming language used in writing computer programs affects the form that the final program takes.[citation needed] This debate is analogous to that surrounding the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis[4] in linguistics and cognitive science, which postulates that a particular spoken language's nature influences the habitual thought of its speakers. Different language patterns yield different patterns of thought. This idea challenges the possibility of representing the world perfectly with language because it acknowledges that the mechanisms of any language condition the thoughts of its speaker community.
History
See also: History of programming languages
Ada Lovelace, whose notes added to the end of Luigi Menabrea's paper included the first algorithm designed for processing by an Analytical Engine. She is often recognized as history's first computer programmer.

Programmable devices have existed at least as far back as 1206 AD, when the automata of Al-Jazari were programmable, via pegs and cams, to play various rhythms and drum patterns;[5] and the 1801 Jacquard loom could produce entirely different weaves using different used by changing the "program" - a series of pasteboard cards with holes punched in them.

However, the first computer program is generally dated to 1843, when mathematician Ada Lovelace published an algorithm to calculate a sequence of Bernoulli numbers, intended to be carried out by Charles Babbage's Analytical Engine.[6]
Data and instructions were once stored on external punched cards, which were kept in order and arranged in program decks.

In the 1880s Herman Hollerith invented the concept of storing data in machine-readable form.[7] Later a control panel (plugboard) added to his 1906 Type I Tabulator allowed it to be programmed for different jobs, and by the late 1940s, unit record equipment such as the IBM 602 and IBM 604, were programmed by control panels in a similar way; as were the first electronic computers. However, with the concept of the stored-program computers introduced in 1949, both programs and data were stored and manipulated in the same way in computer memory.

Machine code was the language of early programs, written in the instruction set of the particular machine, often in binary notation. Assembly languages were soon developed that let the programmer specify instruction in a text format, (e.g., ADD X, TOTAL), with abbreviations for each operation code and meaningful names for specifying addresses. However, because an assembly language is little more than a different notation for a machine language, any two machines with different instruction sets also have different assembly languages.
Wired control panel for an IBM 402 Accounting Machine.

High-level languages allow the programmer to write programs in terms that are more abstract, and less bound to the underlying hardware. They harness the power of computers to make programming easier[8] by allowing programmers to specify calculations by entering a formula directly (e.g., Y = X*2 + 5*X + 9). FORTRAN, the first widely used high-level language to have a functional implementation, came out in 1957[9] and many other languages were soon developed - in particular, COBOL aimed at commercial data processing, and Lisp for computer research.

Programs were mostly still entered using punched cards or paper tape. See computer programming in the punch card era. By the late 1960s, data storage devices and computer terminals became inexpensive enough that programs could be created by typing directly into the computers. Text editors were developed that allowed changes and corrections to be made much more easily than with punched cards.
Modern programming
	This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Quality requirements

Whatever the approach to development may be, the final program must satisfy some fundamental properties. The following properties are among the most important:

    Reliability: how often the results of a program are correct. This depends on conceptual correctness of algorithms, and minimization of programming mistakes, such as mistakes in resource management (e.g., buffer overflows and race conditions) and logic errors (such as division by zero or off-by-one errors).
    Robustness: how well a program anticipates problems due to errors (not bugs). This includes situations such as incorrect, inappropriate or corrupt data, unavailability of needed resources such as memory, operating system services and network connections, user error, and unexpected power outages.
    Usability: the ergonomics of a program: the ease with which a person can use the program for its intended purpose or in some cases even unanticipated purposes. Such issues can make or break its success even regardless of other issues. This involves a wide range of textual, graphical and sometimes hardware elements that improve the clarity, intuitiveness, cohesiveness and completeness of a program's user interface.
    Portability: the range of computer hardware and operating system platforms on which the source code of a program can be compiled/interpreted and run. This depends on differences in the programming facilities provided by the different platforms, including hardware and operating system resources, expected behavior of the hardware and operating system, and availability of platform specific compilers (and sometimes libraries) for the language of the source code.
    Maintainability: the ease with which a program can be modified by its present or future developers in order to make improvements or customizations, fix bugs and security holes, or adapt it to new environments. Good practices[10] during initial development make the difference in this regard. This quality may not be directly apparent to the end user but it can significantly affect the fate of a program over the long term.
    Efficiency/performance: Measure of system resources a program consumes (processor time, memory space, slow devices such as disks, network bandwidth and to some extent even user interaction): the less, the better. This also includes careful management of resources, for example cleaning up temporary files and eliminating memory leaks.

Readability of source code

In computer programming, readability refers to the ease with which a human reader can comprehend the purpose, control flow, and operation of source code. It affects the aspects of quality above, including portability, usability and most importantly maintainability.

Readability is important because programmers spend the majority of their time reading, trying to understand and modifying existing source code, rather than writing new source code. Unreadable code often leads to bugs, inefficiencies, and duplicated code. A study[11] found that a few simple readability transformations made code shorter and drastically reduced the time to understand it.

Following a consistent programming style often helps readability. However, readability is more than just programming style. Many factors, having little or nothing to do with the ability of the computer to efficiently compile and execute the code, contribute to readability.[12] Some of these factors include:

    Different indent styles (whitespace)
    Comments
    Decomposition
    Naming conventions for objects (such as variables, classes, procedures, etc.)

The presentation aspects of this (such as indents, line breaks, color highlighting, and so on) are often handled by the source code editor, but the content aspects reflect the programmer's talent and skills.

Various visual programming languages have also been developed with the intent to resolve readability concerns by adopting non-traditional approaches to code structure and display. Integrated development environments (IDEs) aim to integrate all such help. Techniques like Code refactoring can enhance readability.
Algorithmic complexity

The academic field and the engineering practice of computer programming are both largely concerned with discovering and implementing the most efficient algorithms for a given class of problem. For this purpose, algorithms are classified into orders using so-called Big O notation, which expresses resource use, such as execution time or memory consumption, in terms of the size of an input. Expert programmers are familiar with a variety of well-established algorithms and their respective complexities and use this knowledge to choose algorithms that are best suited to the circumstances.
Methodologies

The first step in most formal software development processes is requirements analysis, followed by testing to determine value modeling, implementation, and failure elimination (debugging). There exist a lot of differing approaches for each of those tasks. One approach popular for requirements analysis is Use Case analysis. Many programmers use forms of Agile software development where the various stages of formal software development are more integrated together into short cycles that take a few weeks rather than years. There are many approaches to the Software development process.

Popular modeling techniques include Object-Oriented Analysis and Design (OOAD) and Model-Driven Architecture (MDA). The Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a notation used for both the OOAD and MDA.

A similar technique used for database design is Entity-Relationship Modeling (ER Modeling).

Implementation techniques include imperative languages (object-oriented or procedural), functional languages, and logic languages.
Measuring language usage
Main article: Measuring programming language popularity

It is very difficult to determine what are the most popular of modern programming languages. Methods of measuring programming language popularity include: counting the number of job advertisements that mention the language,[13] the number of books sold and courses teaching the language (this overestimates the importance of newer languages), and estimates of the number of existing lines of code written in the language (this underestimates the number of users of business languages such as COBOL).

Some languages are very popular for particular kinds of applications, while some languages are regularly used to write many different kinds of applications. For example, COBOL is still strong in corporate data centers[14] often on large mainframe computers, Fortran in engineering applications, scripting languages in Web development, and C in embedded software. Many applications use a mix of several languages in their construction and use. New languages are generally designed around the syntax of a prior language with new functionality added, (for example C++ adds object-orientation to C, and Java adds memory management and bytecode to C++, but as a result, loses efficiency and the ability for low-level manipulation).
Debugging
The bug from 1947 which is at the origin of a popular (but incorrect) etymology for the common term for a software defect.
Main article: Debugging

Debugging is a very important task in the software development process since having defects in a program can have significant consequences for its users. Some languages are more prone to some kinds of faults because their specification does not require compilers to perform as much checking as other languages. Use of a static code analysis tool can help detect some possible problems. Normally the first step in debugging is to attempt to reproduce the problem. This can be a non-trivial task, for example as with parallel processes or some unusual software bugs. Also, specific user environment and usage history can make it difficult to reproduce the problem.

After the bug is reproduced, the input of the program may need to be simplified to make it easier to debug. For example, a bug in a compiler can make it crash when parsing some large source file. However, after simplification of the test case, only few lines from the original source file can be sufficient to reproduce the same crash. Such simplification can be done manually, using a divide-and-conquer approach. The programmer will try to remove some parts of original test case and check if the problem still exists. When debugging the problem in a GUI, the programmer can try to skip some user interaction from the original problem description and check if remaining actions are sufficient for bugs to appear.

Debugging is often done with IDEs like Eclipse, Visual Studio, Xcode, Kdevelop, NetBeans and Code::Blocks. Standalone debuggers like GDB are also used, and these often provide less of a visual environment, usually using a command line. Some text editors such as Emacs allow GDB to be invoked through them, to provide a visual environment.
Programming languages
Main articles: Programming language and List of programming languages

Different programming languages support different styles of programming (called programming paradigms). The choice of language used is subject to many considerations, such as company policy, suitability to task, availability of third-party packages, or individual preference. Ideally, the programming language best suited for the task at hand will be selected. Trade-offs from this ideal involve finding enough programmers who know the language to build a team, the availability of compilers for that language, and the efficiency with which programs written in a given language execute. Languages form an approximate spectrum from "low-level" to "high-level"; "low-level" languages are typically more machine-oriented and faster to execute, whereas "high-level" languages are more abstract and easier to use but execute less quickly. It is usually easier to code in "high-level" languages than in "low-level" ones.

Allen Downey, in his book How To Think Like A Computer Scientist, writes:

    The details look different in different languages, but a few basic instructions appear in just about every language:

        Input: Gather data from the keyboard, a file, or some other device.
        Output: Display data on the screen or send data to a file or other device.
        Arithmetic: Perform basic arithmetical operations like addition and multiplication.
        Conditional Execution: Check for certain conditions and execute the appropriate sequence of statements.
        Repetition: Perform some action repeatedly, usually with some variation.

Many computer languages provide a mechanism to call functions provided by shared libraries. Provided the functions in a library follow the appropriate run-time conventions (e.g., method of passing arguments), then these functions may be written in any other language.
Programmers
Main article: Programmer
See also: Software developer and Software engineer

Computer programmers are those who write computer software. Their jobs usually involve:

    Coding
    Debugging
    Documentation
    Integration
    Maintenance
    Requirements analysis
    Software architecture
    Software testing
    Specification

General Programming Reference Sheet

Everyone is free to edit. Please comment for suggestions, including new languages and categories.

Link: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1vwUTaxkENXLYdyV1bYElCNL8r1b66ghzQxnOSSgG_bE/edit#gid=0
See also

    iconComputer Science portal Computing portal Computer networking portal iconComputer programming portal

Main article: Outline of computer programming

    ACCU
    Association for Computing Machinery
    Computer networking
    Hello world program
    Institution of Analysts and Programmers
    National Coding Week
    System programming
    The Art of Computer Programming

References

Shaun Bebbington (2014). "What is coding". Retrieved 2014-03-03.
Shaun Bebbington (2014). "What is programming". Retrieved 2014-03-03.
Paul Graham (2003). "Hackers and Painters". Retrieved 2006-08-22.
Kenneth E. Iverson, the originator of the APL programming language, believed that the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis applied to computer languages (without actually mentioning the hypothesis by name). His Turing award lecture, "Notation as a tool of thought", was devoted to this theme, arguing that more powerful notations aided thinking about computer algorithms. Iverson K.E.,"[dead link]", Communications of the ACM, 23: 444-465 (August 1980).
Fowler, Charles B. (October 1967). "The Museum of Music: A History of Mechanical Instruments". Music Educators Journal. Music Educators Journal, Vol. 54, No. 2. 54 (2): 45–49. JSTOR 3391092. doi:10.2307/3391092.
Fuegi, J.; Francis, J. (2003). "Lovelace & babbage and the creation of the 1843 'notes'". IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 25 (4): 16. doi:10.1109/MAHC.2003.1253887.
"Columbia University Computing History - Herman Hollerith". Columbia.edu. Retrieved 2010-04-25.
"Fortran creator John Backus dies". msnbc.com. Retrieved 19 November 2014.
"Fortran creator John Backus dies - Tech and gadgets- msnbc.com". MSNBC. 2007-03-20. Retrieved 2010-04-25.
"Programming 101: Tips to become a good programmer - Wisdom Geek". Wisdom Geek. 2016-05-19. Retrieved 2016-05-23.
James L. Elshoff, Michael Marcotty, Improving computer program readability to aid modification, Communications of the ACM, v.25 n.8, p.512-521, Aug 1982.
Multiple (wiki). "Readability". Docforge. Retrieved 2010-01-30.
Survey of Job advertisements mentioning a given language

    Mitchell, Robert. "The Cobol Brain Drain". Computer World. Retrieved 9 May 2015.

Further reading

    A.K. Hartmann, Practical Guide to Computer Simulations, Singapore: World Scientific (2009)
    A. Hunt, D. Thomas, and W. Cunningham, The Pragmatic Programmer. From Journeyman to Master, Amsterdam: Addison-Wesley Longman (1999)
    Brian W. Kernighan, The Practice of Programming, Pearson (1999)
    Weinberg, Gerald M., The Psychology of Computer Programming, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold (1971)
    Edsger W. Dijkstra, A Discipline of Programming, Prentice-Hall (1976)
    O.-J. Dahl, E.W.Dijkstra, C.A.R. Hoare, Structured Pogramming, Academic Press (1972)
    David Gries, The Science of Programming, Springer-Verlag (1981)

External links
	Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Computer Programming
	Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Windows Programming
Library resources about
Computer programming

    Online books
    Resources in your library
    Resources in other libraries

    Media related to Programming at Wikimedia Commons
    Quotations related to Programming at Wikiquote
    Learning materials related to programming at Wikiversity
    Software engineering at DMOZ

[show]

    v t e

Major fields of computer science
[show]

    v t e

Software engineering
Authority control

    LCCN: sh85107310 GND: 4076370-5 BNF: cb11932648m (data) NDL: 00569223

Categories:

    Computer programmingComputers

Navigation menu

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

    Article
    Talk

    Read
    Edit
    View history

Search

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikibooks
    Wikiquote
    Wikiversity

Languages

    Afrikaans
    العربية
    Aragonés
    Asturianu
    Azərbaycanca
    বাংলা
    Беларуская
    Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
    Български
    Bosanski
    Català
    Čeština
    Dansk
    Deutsch
    Eesti
    Ελληνικά
    Español
    Esperanto
    Euskara
    فارسی
    Français
    Galego
    한국어
    Հայերեն
    हिन्दी
    Hrvatski
    Bahasa Indonesia
    Italiano
    עברית
    ಕನ್ನಡ
    Қазақша
    Latina
    Latviešu
    Lietuvių
    La .lojban.
    Magyar
    Македонски
    മലയാളം
    مصرى
    Bahasa Melayu
    Монгол
    Nederlands
    日本語
    Norsk bokmål
    Norsk nynorsk
    Олык марий
    Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
    پنجابی
    ភាសាខ្មែរ
    Polski
    Português
    Română
    Русский
    Scots
    Shqip
    Simple English
    Slovenčina
    Slovenščina
    Српски / srpski
    Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
    Suomi
    Svenska
    தமிழ்
    ไทย
    Тоҷикӣ
    Türkçe
    Türkmençe
    ᨅᨔ ᨕᨘᨁᨗ
    Українська
    اردو
    Tiếng Việt
    ייִדיש
    Zazaki
    中文

Edit links

    This page was last edited on 29 June 2017, at 19:34.
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    Wikimedia Foundation
    Powered by MediaWiki

