Explore
Nanodegree
Catalog
For Business
Sign In
Get Started

Master React, React & Redux, and React Native, with Udacity and React Training’s experts. Enroll now!
Explore
Nanodegree
Catalog
For Business
Sign In
Get Started
Free Course
Web Development

How to Build a Blog
Start Free Course
Nanodegree Program
Deep Learning Foundations

Accelerate your career with the credential that fast-tracks you to job success.
About this Course

Try to picture yourself sitting down with your computer, ready to start developing a fully functional web application for the first time, available online for millions to use. “Where should I even begin? How long is this going to take me? Am I making any mistakes along the way?” The questions may leave you with an uneasy feeling that you will learn many lessons the hard way.

In this intermediate course, Steve Huffman will teach you everything he wished he knew when he started building Reddit and, more recently, Hipmunk, as a lead engineer. Starting from the basics of how the web works, this course will walk you through core web development concepts such as how internet and browsers fit together, form validations, databases, APIs, integrating with other websites, scaling issues, and more; all of which form part of the knowledge it takes to build a web application of your own.
Play Trailer
Course Cost
Free
Timeline
Approx. 3 months
Skill Level
Intermediate
Included in Course

    Rich Learning Content

    Interactive Quizzes

    Taught by Industry Pros

    Self-Paced Learning

    Student Support Community

Join the Path to Greatness

This free course is your first step towards a new career with the Deep Learning Foundations Nanodegree Program.
Free Course
Web Development

Enhance your skill set and boost your hirability through innovative, independent learning.
Icon steps 54aa753742d05d598baf005f2bb1b5bb6339a7d544b84089a1eee6acd5a8543d
Nanodegree Program
Deep Learning Foundations

Accelerate your career with the credential that fast-tracks you to job success.
Learn More
Course Leads

    Steve Huffman
    Steve Huffman

    Instructor
    Sean Bennett
    Sean Bennett

    Instructor

What You Will Learn
Lesson 1
How the Web Works

    Learn basic concepts regarding the internet, browsers, and HTML.
    Start using HTML (HyperText Markup Language) to format content for webpages.
    HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) via GET and POST requests.

Lesson 2
Forms and Input

    Learn about forms, a very common way to obtain input from users.
    Learn how to get and process user input from webpages using Google App Engine.

Lesson 3
Databases

Lesson 4
User Accounts and Security

Lesson 5
APIs

Lesson 6
Caching

Lesson 7
Scaling Up

View All Lessons
Prerequisites and Requirements

In order to take the full advantage of this course, we want you to be well prepared for it. This course assumes an intermediate proficiency programming with Python, as well as a solid knowledge on the following topics:

    Basic computer science concepts such as procedures, decision statements, and loops.
    Basic data structures such as lists, dictionaries, and hash tables.
    Object-oriented programming.

Please feel free to peek at the Intro to Computer Science and Programming Foundations with Python courses to make sure you are comfortable with these required concepts for the course.

See the Technology Requirements for using Udacity.
Why Take This Course

By taking this course, you will embark on a digital adventure to build your very own application live on the web. Valuable lessons often come from experience, and it’s from this experience that Steve brings a fresh perspective to the classroom to show you how to approach building your web application in a way that assuages the potential challenges you may face. In this course, you will learn by doing. Once you dive into the course experience, you will work on awesome projects:

    Have you ever thought about what it takes to build a blog from the ground up? Over the course of six lessons, you will build a blog together with Steve that will be fully functional, online, for anybody to read by the end of the course.

    Have you ever wondered how a wiki works? As a final project for this course, you will be able to take all of your newly gained knowledge and apply it to build a complete wiki.

This course concentrates on back-end development, but regardless if you are interested in front-end development, back-end development, or anywhere in between the stack, this course will teach you the fundamental knowledge you need break into the web development world. Are you ready to dive in?
What do I get?

    Instructor videos
    Learn by doing exercises
    Taught by industry professionals

Related Free Courses
General
How to Make a Platformer Using libGDX
General
2D Game Development with libGDX
General
Mobile Web Development
General
Make Your Own 2048
General
HTTP & Web Servers
General
Engagement & Monetization | Mobile Games
Popular Free Courses
Digital Marketing
Digital Marketing Fundamentals
Non-Tech
Product Design
Digital Marketing
Email Marketing

    Featured Programs
        Android Basics
        Android Developer
        Become an iOS Developer
        Business Analyst
        Data Analyst
        Front-End Web Developer
        Full Stack Web Developer
        Intro to Programming
        React
    Only At Udacity
        Artificial Intelligence
        Deep Learning Foundations
        Digital Marketing
        Machine Learning Engineer
        Robotics
        Self-Driving Car Engineer
        VR Developer
    Resources
        Catalog
        Career Resource Center
        Hiring Partners
        Student Success
        Udacity Connect
        Udacity Talks
        Scholarships
    Programs
        Nanodegree Plus
        Veterans
        Georgia Tech
        Udacity Self-Driving Car
    Company
        About
        Blog
        In the News
        Jobs
        Mobile
        Udacity Intersect
    Business
        Udacity for Business
        Corporate Training
        Hire Graduates
    Support
        Contact Us
        Help and FAQ
        Service Status
        Course Guides

    © 2011–2017 Udacity, Inc.
    Legal & Privacy Regulatory Information Site Map

United States

"Nanodegree" is a registered trademark of Udacity. © 2011–2017 Udacity, Inc.

Udacity is not an accredited university and we don't confer traditional degrees. Udacity Nanodegree programs represent collaborations with our industry partners who help us develop our content and who hire many of our program graduates.
